docs: Draft of troubleshooting topics for Server Access (#31997)
gravitational/teleport: docs/pages/server-access/troubleshooting-server.mdx

---
title: Troubleshooting Server Access
description: Describes common issues and solutions for access to servers.
---

This section describes common issues that you might encounter in managing access to servers
with Teleport and how to work around or resolve them.

## Starting SSH sessions fails

> By default, when Teleport connects to a server, the service runs as the user login that starts 
> the SSH session. If starting the session fails, it might be because the file system permissions
> for the Teleport binary don't allow other user logins to connect to the remote server.
> This issue might be caused by systems that prevent newly installed software from being executable 
> by any user.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you start a new SSH session, Teleport forks itself and the child process
runs as the OS user who is attempting to connect. If the filesystem permissions
on the `teleport` binary don't include execute permissions for this user, the
session will fail to start.

This issue could be caused by systems that prevent newly installed software from
being executable by any user.  
```

Reasoning for the suggestion:
- 'by default' is unnecessary and implies that you can change this behavior. you can't. it's just how teleport works.
- incorrect file permissions do not deny access to connect, they deny access to execute

### Symptom

This issue results in a disconnected session and an error message similar to the following:

```text
Failed to launch: fork/exec /proc/self/exe: permission denied.
Process exited with status 255
```

### Solution

You should check the permission settings for the `teleport` binary. 

To check the file system permissions on the `teleport` binary:

1. Open a terminal shell on the computer where you have installed the `teleport` service.

1. Determine the location and file system permission of the Teleport binary by running the following command:
   
   ```code
   ls -al $(which teleport)
   ```

   The command should return output similar to the following:
   
   ```text
   -rwxr-xr-x  1 root  wheel  531849504 Aug 30 18:32 /usr/local/bin/teleport
   ```
   
   If you don't see the permission that allows other users to read and execute (-rwxr-x**r-x**), 
   you should update the permissions. For example:

   ```code

>    chmod o+rx teleport

Reviewer: In the previous step, we suggest that we need all 3 execute bits to be set (note the three `x` characters in `rwxr-x**r-x**`).

`chmod o+rx` is only going to set the third and final one. To be consistent with what we said before, we probably want to say `chmod go+rx`.

   ```
   
1. Restart the `teleport` service.

## Missing logins for single sign-on users

If you use an external identity provider to enable single sign-on for users, you should be sure
to assign logins for those users.

### Symptom

Users who have access to Teleport through an authentication connector for an external identity
provider don't see any of the logins they need to access remote resources.

### Solution

> To fix this issue, you can assign logins to your single sign-on users or modify the traits in 

Reviewer: We should probably mention the auth connector here, right? (It's the connector that turns SSO traits into Teleport roles, and the Teleport roles that contain the logins)

the Teleport roles assigned to users through their group membership in the external identity provider.
For more information about using traits in roles, see [Role Templates](../access-controls/guides/role-templates.mdx).

> ## Listing available servers

Reviewer: The previous titles indicate some sort of problem (can't start a session, don't see any logins, etc.)

This title doesn't really describe a problem. It just mentions a feature. Maybe change it to `Offline servers show in listing` or something.

For example, you might run either of these commands and see output similar to the following for
servers that have previously sent a heartbeat signal to the Teleport Proxy Service even if
one of these servers subsequently went offline:

```
Node Name      Address        Labels                  
-------------- -------------- ----------------------- 
ip-172-3-1-242 127.0.0.1:3022 hostname=ip-172-3-1-242 
ip-172-3-1-75  ⟵ Tunnel       hostname=ip-172-3-1-75  
ip-172-3-2-177 ⟵ Tunnel       hostname=ip-172-3-2-177
```

### Solution

To investigate whether a server that previously sent a heartbeat has become unresponsive, you can run the 
`tsh ls` or `tctl nodes ls` command with the `--format json` command-line option to see additional 
information, including an expiration time. For example:

```json
    "kind": "node",
    "version": "v2",
    "metadata": {
      "name": "c78612d9-dab4-497f-a4d8-59ddb7edc6e9",
      "labels": {
        "teleport.internal/resource-id": "3547a530-3b58-4f65-8335-c5cf99c7b374"
      },
      "expires": "2023-09-15T21:40:17.653190645Z",
      "id": 1694813417653574518
    },
```

> If the server is sending a regular heartbeat signal, the `expires` value should be

Reviewer: Worth noting that while this is true today (all servers heartbeat at the same interval) @fspmarshall is exploring the idea of heartbeating at a variable interval depending on the size of the cluster.

I wonder if there's a better way to address this topic to make it more future proof.

approximately eight to ten minutes from the current time. If the time to expire is
less eight to ten minutes from the current time—for example, in the next two minutes—it's
likely that the server has stopped sending the heartbeat.

## Unable to join a shared session

> Moderated sessions or remote shared sessions enable multiple users to observe, participate, or terminate

Reviewer: This sentence is not incorrect, but since it's not specific to moderated sessions I would generalize it a bit.

```suggestion
Teleport allows multiple users to observe or participate in
```

on the `teleport` binary don't include execute permissions for this user, the
session fails to start.

This issue could be caused by systems that prevent newly installed software from
being executable by any user.

### Symptom

This issue results in a disconnected session and an error message similar to the following:

```text
Failed to launch: fork/exec /proc/self/exe: permission denied.
Process exited with status 255
```

### Solution

You should check the permission settings for the `teleport` binary. 

To check the file system permissions on the `teleport` binary:

1. Open a terminal shell on the computer where you have installed the `teleport` service.

1. Determine the location and file system permission of the Teleport binary by running the following command:
   
   ```code
   ls -al $(which teleport)
   ```

   The command should return output similar to the following:
   
   ```text
   -rwxr-xr-x  1 root  wheel  531849504 Aug 30 18:32 /usr/local/bin/teleport
   ```
   
   If you don't see the permission that allows other users to read and execute (-rwxr-x**r-x**), 
   you should update the permissions. For example:

   ```code

>    chmod go+rx teleport

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   sudo chmod go+rx $(which teleport)
```

---
title: Troubleshooting Server Access
description: Describes common issues and solutions for access to servers.
---

This section describes common issues that you might encounter in managing access to servers
with Teleport and how to work around or resolve them.

## Starting SSH sessions fails

> By default, if you use SSH to connect to a server, Teleport runs as the user login that starts 

Reviewer 3: > By default, if you use SSH to connect to a server, Teleport runs as the user login > that starts  the SSH session.

Does this refer to using `tsh ssh`?

> the SSH session. If starting the session fails, it might be due to the Teleport file permission

Reviewer 3: I'm not sure I understand "Teleport file permission settings." Are these the file permissions in the `/var/lib/teleport` data directory? Maybe add an example after this sentence?

Author: File system permissions on the service, I think.

> settings for the user login that Teleport is using to connect to the remote servr.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
settings for the user login that Teleport is using to connect to the remote server.
```

This issue might be caused by systems that prevent newly installed software from being executable 
by any user.  

### Symptom

This issue results in a disconnected session and an error message similar to the following:

```text
Failed to launch: fork/exec /proc/self/exe: permission denied.
Process exited with status 255
```

### Solution

You should check the permission settings for the `teleport` service. 

> To check the permissions on the teleport service:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To check the permissions on the Teleport service:
```
Or use code style to be consistent with the previous sentence.

1. Determine the location of the Teleport binary by running the following command:
   
   ```code
   which teleport
   ```

1. Check the permission settings for the binary by running the following command:
   
   ```code
   ls -al <Var name="/usr/local/bin/teleport" />
   ```

   The command should return output similar to the following:
   
   ```text
   -rwxr-xr-x  1 root  wheel  531849504 Aug 30 18:32 /usr/local/bin/teleport
   ```
   
   If you don't see the permission that allows other users to read and execute (-rwxr-x**r-x**), 
   you should update the permissions. For example:

   ```code
   chmod o+rx teleport
   ```
   
1. Restart the `teleport` service.

## Missing logins for single sign-on users

If you use an external identity provider to enable single sign-on for users, you should be sure
to assign logins for those users.

### Symptom

Users who have access to Teleport through an authentication connector for an external identity
provider don't see any of the logins they need to access remote resources.

### Solution

To fix this issue, you can assign logins to your single sign-on users or modify the traits in 

> the Teleport roles assigned to users through their group membership in the external identity provider.

Reviewer 3: I would recommend linking to another docs page here so users can find out more about Teleport traits and role mapping.

## Listing available servers

In some cases,  running `tsh ls` or `tctl nodes ls` commands might include servers that are offline.
For example, a server that has stopped sending a heartbeat to the Teleport Proxy Service
might continue to be listed as available in the output of `tsh ls` or `tctl nodes ls` commands for
10 minutes or more.

### Symptom

An unresponsive server is listed as available in the output of `tsh ls` or `tctl nodes ls` commands.
For example, you might run either of these commands and see output similar to the following for
servers that have previously sent a heartbeat signal to the Teleport Proxy Service even if
one of these servers subsequently went offline:

```code
Node Name      Address        Labels                  
-------------- -------------- ----------------------- 
ip-172-3-1-242 127.0.0.1:3022 hostname=ip-172-3-1-242 
ip-172-3-1-75  ⟵ Tunnel       hostname=ip-172-3-1-75  
ip-172-3-2-177 ⟵ Tunnel       hostname=ip-172-3-2-177
```

### Solution

> To investigate whether an unresponsive server is sending a heartbeat, you can run the 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
To investigate whether a server that sent a heartbeat has become unresponsive, you can run the 
```
To be consistent with the rest of this section: the server sent a heartbeat, then became unresponsive.

`tsh ls` or `tctl nodes ls` command with the `--format json` command-line option to
see additional inormation, including an expiration time. For example

```json
    "kind": "node",
    "version": "v2",
    "metadata": {
      "name": "c78612d9-dab4-497f-a4d8-59ddb7edc6e9",
      "labels": {
        "teleport.internal/resource-id": "3547a530-3b58-4f65-8335-c5cf99c7b374"
      },
      "expires": "2023-09-15T21:40:17.653190645Z",
      "id": 1694813417653574518
    },
```

> If the server is sending a regular heartbeat signal, the expires value should be

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If the server is sending a regular heartbeat signal, the `expires` value should be
```

> approximately eight to ten minutes from the current time. If time to expire is

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
approximately eight to ten minutes from the current time. If the time to expire is
```

less eight to ten minutes from the current time—for example, in the next two minutes—it's
likely that the server has stopped sending the heartbeat.

## Unable to join a shared session

Moderated sessions or remote shared sessions enable multiple users to observe, participate, or terminate

> a session in real time. You can define rules and configure role-based policies to control which users can join other user's 

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
a session in real time. You can define rules and configure role-based policies to control which users can join other users' 
```
Or "another user's"

---
title: Troubleshooting Server Access
description: Describes common issues and solutions for access to servers.
---

This section describes common issues that you might encounter in managing access to servers
with Teleport and how to work around or resolve them.

## Starting SSH sessions fails

By default, if you use SSH to connect to a server, Teleport runs as the user login that starts 
the SSH session. If starting the session fails, it might be because the file system permissions
for the Teleport binary don't allow other user logins to connect to the remote server.
This issue might be caused by systems that prevent newly installed software from being executable 
by any user.  

### Symptom

This issue results in a disconnected session and an error message similar to the following:

```text
Failed to launch: fork/exec /proc/self/exe: permission denied.
Process exited with status 255
```

### Solution

> You should check the permission settings for the `teleport` service. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
You should check the permission settings for the `teleport` binary. 
```

To check the file system permissions on the `teleport` service:

1. Open a terminal shell on the computer where you have installed the `teleport` service.

1. Determine the location of the Teleport binary by running the following command:
   
   ```code
   which teleport
   ```

1. Check the permission settings for the binary by running the following command:
   
   ```code

>    ls -al <Var name="/usr/local/bin/teleport" />

Reviewer: Consider combining the first two steps: `ls -al $(which teleport)`

Users who have access to Teleport through an authentication connector for an external identity
provider don't see any of the logins they need to access remote resources.

### Solution

To fix this issue, you can assign logins to your single sign-on users or modify the traits in 
the Teleport roles assigned to users through their group membership in the external identity provider.
For more information about using traits in roles, see [Role Templates](../access-controls/guides/role-templates/).

## Listing available servers

In some cases,  running `tsh ls` or `tctl nodes ls` commands might include servers that are offline.
For example, a server that has stopped sending a heartbeat to the Teleport Proxy Service
might continue to be listed as available in the output of `tsh ls` or `tctl nodes ls` commands for
10 minutes or more.

### Symptom

An unresponsive server is listed as available in the output of `tsh ls` or `tctl nodes ls` commands.
For example, you might run either of these commands and see output similar to the following for
servers that have previously sent a heartbeat signal to the Teleport Proxy Service even if
one of these servers subsequently went offline:

> ```code

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
```

    "kind": "node",
    "version": "v2",
    "metadata": {
      "name": "c78612d9-dab4-497f-a4d8-59ddb7edc6e9",
      "labels": {
        "teleport.internal/resource-id": "3547a530-3b58-4f65-8335-c5cf99c7b374"
      },
      "expires": "2023-09-15T21:40:17.653190645Z",
      "id": 1694813417653574518
    },
```

If the server is sending a regular heartbeat signal, the `expires` value should be
approximately eight to ten minutes from the current time. If the time to expire is
less eight to ten minutes from the current time—for example, in the next two minutes—it's
likely that the server has stopped sending the heartbeat.

## Unable to join a shared session

Moderated sessions or remote shared sessions enable multiple users to observe, participate, or terminate
a session in real time. You can define rules and configure role-based policies to control which users can join 
other users' sessions from `tsh` and the Teleport Web UI. If you are unable to join a shared session, you should
check your role assignments and ensure you have a role that include the `join_session` permission.
For example:

```yaml
kind: role
metadata:
  name: auditor
version: v6
spec:
  allow:
    join_sessions:

>       - name: Auditor oversight

Reviewer: ```suggestion
      - name: Join prod sessions
```

## Starting SSH sessions fails

When you start a new SSH session, Teleport forks itself and the child process
runs as the OS user who is attempting to connect. If the file system permissions
on the `teleport` binary don't include execute permissions for this user, the

> session faila to start.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
session fails to start.
```
